Ads in ChatGPT, Why OpenAI Needs Ads, The Long Road to Instagram
Tuesday, January 20, 2026
Good morning,

On last week’s episode of Sharp Tech, Andrew and I discussed the Vision Pro’s live opportunity, why United Airlines is one of my favorite tech stories, and why Grok’s bikini week was so upsetting.

On to the Update:

Ads in ChatGPT
From Bloomberg:

OpenAI will start testing advertisements in the ChatGPT app for certain US users, marking a major shift for the company as it seeks to bolster revenue from the popular chatbot. The ads will appear in the coming weeks for logged-in users of the free version of ChatGPT as well as a newer, lower-cost $8-a-month “Go” plan that first launched in India and is now expanding to the US, the company said Friday. The more expensive paid tiers of ChatGPT will remain free of ads.

OpenAI’s decision to embrace advertising reflects a broader push to diversify its revenue ahead of a potential initial public offering and to help offset the immense cost of building and supporting artificial intelligence systems. OpenAI, which does not expect to be profitable for years, has committed to spend about $1.4 trillion on data centers and chips for AI.

The move represents a reversal of sorts for the company, which has primarily relied on a subscription model. Chief Executive Officer Sam Altman had previously expressed his personal distaste for advertising, framing it as a “last resort.” Altman had cited concerns that users might not trust a chatbot as much if they think it’s selling products. Other rivals such as Alphabet Inc.’s Google have also begun introducing ads into AI products. To start, OpenAI plans to test advertising for sponsored products and services at the bottom of relevant responses in ChatGPT and to clearly separate the ads from the rest of the chat. The company said it believes ads could help users make better shopping decisions using the chatbot.

Fidji Simo wrote a post about Our approach to advertising and expanding access to ChatGPT, which included the following principles:

Mission alignment: Our mission is to ensure AGI benefits all of humanity; our pursuit of advertising is always in support of that mission and making AI more accessible.
Answer independence: Ads do not influence the answers ChatGPT gives you. Answers are optimized based on what’s most helpful to you. Ads are always separate and clearly labeled.
Conversation privacy: We keep your conversations with ChatGPT private from advertisers, and we never sell your data to advertisers.
Choice and control: You control how your data is used. You can turn off personalization, and you can clear the data used for ads at any time. We’ll always offer a way to not see ads in ChatGPT, including a paid tier that’s ad-free.
Long-term value: We do not optimize for time spent in ChatGPT. We prioritize user trust and user experience over revenue.
Simo said that the initial ads would be contextual based on the current conversation:

We’re not launching ads yet, but we do plan to start testing in the coming weeks for logged in adults in the U.S. on the free and Go tiers. To start, we plan to test ads at the bottom of answers in ChatGPT when there’s a relevant sponsored product or service based on your current conversation. Ads will be clearly labeled and separated from the organic answer. You’ll be able to learn more about why you’re seeing that ad, or dismiss any ad and tell us why. During our test, we will not show ads in accounts where the user tells us or we predict that they are under 18, and ads are not eligible to appear near sensitive or regulated topics like health, mental health or politics.

Here’s an example of what the first ad formats we plan to test could look like:
[image: chatgpt conversation]

I had an extended discussion about why ChatGPT should include an advertising model in this interview with OpenAI CEO Sam Altman a year ago:

Ben: From my perspective, when you talk about serving billions of users and being a consumer tech company. This means advertising. Do you disagree?

SA: I hope not. I’m not opposed. If there is a good reason to do it, I’m not dogmatic about this. But we have a great business selling subscriptions.

Ben: There’s still a long road to being profitable and making back all your money. And then the thing with advertising is it increases the breadth of your addressable market and increases the depth because you can increase your revenue per user and the advertiser foots the bill. You’re not running into any price elasticity issues, people just use it more.

SA: Currently, I am more excited to figure out how we can charge people a lot of money for a really great automated software engineer or other kind of agent than I am making some number of dimes with an advertising based model.

Ben: I know, but most people aren’t rational. They don’t pay for productivity software.

SA: Let’s find out.

I guess we’ve found out?

Why OpenAI Needs Ads
I want to focus on what I said in that interview about breadth and depth; this is what I said at the MoffettNathanson conference last spring:

What I think is clear is they have to build an advertising product, and the reason they have to build an advertising product is any consumer Internet product has to be advertising, because it’s such a beneficial model to everyone involved, and the reason it’s so beneficial is you get to indefinitely and infinitely increase average revenue per user without any worries about price elasticity, because the entire increase in average revenue per user is borne by the advertisers who are paying it willingly because they’re getting a positive return on their investment, and everyone’s using it for free so you can reach the whole world. Then what happens with that is once you get that model going, you have a massive R&D advantage, because you have so much more money coming in than anyone who doesn’t have that cycle or who has to charge users for it.

So the way they got, and I think I believe the myth around ChatGPT, that it was an accident, I think that was 100% the case that it was never expected to be what it became. But once it became what it was, and this was very clear I think within a matter of weeks or months, I wrote it I think in February right after, The Accidental Consumer Tech Company, these are the hardest things to build. The last one was Facebook, it’s been 15 or 20 years — I’m getting old, 20 years — that’s how rare they are, and the reason it’s so rare is because you have to acquire a massive number of users and you have to acquire them organically. You go back to Google, I remember being in college and Google comes out and it was just better than everything else and you told people, they tried it out one time and they were sold and that’s how they became a massive company. They weren’t buying users, they weren’t doing paid user acquisition, everyone just realized it was better and they won and that almost never works. But that’s also why we almost never have new major consumer tech companies. But once it works, you have to go to the advertising model, it’s the only thing that works.

What is a tech company, anyways? I explored this question in 2018 in Lessons From Spotify:

Advertising-based consumer companies spend huge amounts on R&D building products that appeal to users, although usually not a lot on sales and marketing to acquire users; consumer companies that break through to the scale necessary to support advertising rely on viral network effects. Where the sales and marketing spend comes is in courting advertisers; however, the most valuable consumer companies of all — the super-aggregators — generate the same sort of network effects allowing them to add advertisers in a scalable way as well.

This produces the ideal venture outcome: a company where users and revenue grow far more quickly than costs.
[Chart: Users, revenue, fixed costs, marginal costs with time]
A drawing of a Graph of a Venture Company's Costs
Again, this is possible because there are minimal marginal costs — more users are not necessarily more expensive. Of course fixed costs grow over time, but they only grow linearly — earning ever-increasing revenue on a relatively stable cost basis is the definition of scale.

This chart does not apply to OpenAI, in two respects. First, while inference costs are heavily optimized and unit margins — at least for paying customers — are almost certainly fine, they are also not zero in the way CPU-bound tasks came to be over time. The bigger issue, however, is that fixed costs — i.e. the cost of compute for training, reinforcement learning, experimentation, etc. — are not a gently rising curve; they appear to be an exponentially increasing one. That’s my takeaway from another OpenAI post published by CFO Sarah Frier yesterday entitled A business that scales with the value of intelligence:
[Chart: Compute costs, revenue over time]
Looking back on the past three years, our ability to serve customers—as measured by revenue—directly tracks available compute: Compute grew 3X year over year or 9.5X from 2023 to 2025: 0.2 GW in 2023, 0.6 GW in 2024, and ~1.9 GW in 2025. While revenue followed the same curve growing 3X year over year, or 10X from 2023 to 2025: $2B ARR in 2023, $6B in 2024, and $20B+ in 2025. This is never-before-seen growth at such scale. And we firmly believe that more compute in these periods would have led to faster customer adoption and monetization.


I find this to be a fascinating admission: here we have the OpenAI CFO proudly writing that OpenAI does not have a scalable business model! In order to make more money the company needs to spend more money, because that is what those power numbers are: they represent real ongoing costs, not just for power but also the GPUs that are being powered (which, of course, are generating ever more tokens per watt, but that actually makes Frier’s argument more concerning).

Now again, I am giving OpenAI the benefit of the doubt in terms of the margin profile of those revenue numbers; Epoch AI estimated that 70% of OpenAI’s 2024 compute costs went to R&D, which means, assuming those numbers continue to be roughly accurate, that revenue has increased much more than the cost of inference. At the same time, OpenAI clearly needs to continue to spend on R&D to maintain its position, so perhaps such a blunt comparison actually is the best one. Regardless, the fact remains that OpenAI, unlike traditional tech companies, has rapidly increasing costs, which — according to their CFO! — roughly track revenue.

This point, more than anything else, explains why the company so desperately needs an advertising model. Advertising is the only potential business model that can meaningfully bend the revenue curve such that the company can not just fund its compute but gain leverage on it, for all of the reasons I laid out before: first, advertising increases the breadth of the business, in that you can offer a better product to more people, increasing usage and expanding inventory. Second, advertising increases the depth of the business, in that there is infinite upside in terms of average revenue per user: more usage means more inventory on one hand, and building out the capability for effective targeting and high conversion rates increases the amount that advertisers are willing to pay — even as the cost to the user remains the same (ideally free).

The Long Road to Instagram
The problem for OpenAI is that Google and Meta are already very good at advertising, and Google in particular has an increasingly well-known ChatGPT alternative in Gemini that the company can indefinitely subsidize thanks to its already at-scale Search advertising business. OpenAI faces the massive challenge of, from many users’ perspective, degrading its user experience with ads in order to fund its operations while a subsidized alternative is only a click — or download — away.

The issue, of course, is that ChatGPT should have had ads a long time ago. What makes this point more than anything is that those ads, had they launched in 2024 or 2025, would probably have looked a lot like what these ads are going to look like: contextual placement based on the current context of the conversation. This is relatively easy in terms of targeting, although it also increases the risk that users start to wonder if ads are influencing answers, given they are so clearly related to the context of the conversation. Still, you have to start somewhere, and this is the easiest way to do basic targeting while a more fully-featured ad model is built out.

That future ad model should, as Eric Seufert has persuasively argued, look a lot more like Meta’s ad product in the long run. Specifically, ads should be targeted to the user independent of the current context:

I don’t believe that the affiliate-like eCommerce recommendation system implemented by OpenAI is the optimal business model for either ChatGPT or the broader chatbot product category. In this piece, I’ll argue that personalized, conversion-optimized advertising is a superior business model for chatbots than affiliate distribution: it is more scalable, better aligns with consumers’ interests, and has more positive-sum characteristics for society as a whole.

In particular, I believe that personalized advertising will be the model that OpenAI ultimately adopts as the primary monetization scheme for ChatGPT. This is important to consider precisely because OpenAI serves as an avatar for the commercial prospects and general sustainability of the artificial intelligence market, to the extent that the company’s infrastructure commitments are now viewed as systemic economic vulnerabilities. For this reason, the business model that OpenAI adopts to achieve sustainable growth is of critical importance, not just for its own prospects, but also for those of the overall consumer-facing AI category.

The advertising that OpenAI has announced is not affiliate marketing; it is, however, narrow in its inventory potential (because OpenAI needs inventory that matches the current chat context) and gives the appearance of a conflict of interest (even if it doesn’t exist). What the company needs to get to is an advertising model that draws on the vast knowledge it gains of users — both via chats and also via partnerships across the ecosystem that OpenAI needs to build — to show users ads that are compelling not because they are linked to the current discussion but because ChatGPT understands you better than anyone else. Sam Altman said on X that he likes Instagram ads:
[image: Sam Altman announcing ads on Twitter]

That’s not the ad product OpenAI announced, but it’s the one they need to get to; they would be a whole lot closer had they started this journey a long time ago, but at least they’re a whole lot closer today than they were a week ago.